“I am working on a set of theses that I'm going to use for a essay slash manifesto that pertains to using AI agentic tools in a more effective manner. I want you to basically listen to each thesis and the supporting evidence I give for it, and then at the end, I will tell you when I'm done, and I want you to compile it all together into a report that I can publish as a markdown file.”
00:23

I’m ready whenever you are! Share each thesis one by one, along with the evidence, and I’ll pay close attention. When you’re finished, I’ll neatly pull everything together!

“Great, thanks. Also, when I'm talking, please don't interrupt me, so I may tell you when I finish a thesis, but just give a quick acknowledgment, no long words, no long speeches.”
00:08

Got it! I’ll keep it brief—just a quick confirmation when you finish each one. Let’s go!

“First thesis, for building these AI agentic tools, the local file system is effectively the best way of doing it. The reason I say that is that you've got a couple different options when like saving data. You can save it to a database or you can save it to a local file system, but the file system has a lot of advantages. First off, the file system is almost like a CLI agent's native language where they are trained, they're built, they know how to use it well. Whereas if you're using a database or application-based approach to saving data, you now have to build a bunch of API connectors and then manage that additional infrastructure, whereas the file system you kind of get for free. Every machine that you're using is going to have a file system that you can then leverage to do your agentic work on.”
00:42

Got it—first thesis

“So the first thing is that we are going to focus very heavily on this file system-based approach. And I guess kind of an additional advantage of this file system approach is that...”
00:13

I’m following along—just let me know when that thesis is fully wrapped!

Another advantage of the file-based approach is that there already exists lots of tools to basically use backup and version control the file system. The most obvious is Git. You can basically get backup everything that you need in order to keep the agent system running and not have to build your own backup or version control system out of the box. Finally, another advantage of the file-based system approach is that it's very hackable. You can go in and dive into all the files to understand how things are connected together and how the system is built, and you can modify it at will as opposed to needing to modify code or applications, which is much more difficult.

Got it — first thesis noted.

Okay, this is number two. In order to create a knowledge base for the application, first off, a knowledge base is maybe the most important part of the system because agents implicitly have lots of knowledge that is gleaned from the internet or from other sources that kind of give it a baseline of information that can use, but agents are lacking domain-specific expertise to allow it to do actual jobs that you care about in the real world. So for instance, agents don't know about me specifically. They don't know about a company, a job, anything that I particularly care about in detail. And so we need to build up our own knowledge base that concerns to my particular or my company's particular concerns, and then those concerns need to be documented in a way the agent can get access to them. There are a few different ways of doing that, but the most natural and the most obvious is some sort of a graph structure where bits of knowledge are connected together somehow based on their natural connections as a data structure. So, like, for instance, you could build a tree-based structure that, you know, similar pieces of knowledge are grouped together in a tree, but then that precludes certain connections that go across domains. Like if something is, I don't know, like red, like a firetruck, it is both red and it is a truck. And so, you know, there's kind of a relationship with red and there's a relationship with truck. If you use a tree-based structure, you wouldn't know if you put in red or truck, but because you're using a graph-based structure, you can connect it to both very naturally.

Got it — thesis #2 noted.

Okay, so if thesis two is that we need a graph-based structure in order to save our knowledge base, thesis three is the implementation of that graph-based knowledge structure. My argument here is that the best solution using theses one and two is that we need an Obsidian database. Obsidian is basically a markdown-based wiki-style note-taking application. So the idea here is that you're basically using markdown files that can live on the local disk. These files are interconnected, kind of like Wikipedia is. And this creates a graph-based structure out of a sequence of markdown files that's both human and machine-readable. So agents are able to go in, they're able to read these markdown files natively using their typical approaches, and then you can basically combine all these together into an Obsidian vault that then a human can navigate in the same way. This makes that vault both extremely accessible for humans and agents, and it also preserves a graph-based structure allowing you to connect together lots of different topics into a structure that allows you to gain domain-specific expertise on anything that you're concerned about or anything you need to focus on and only focus on the particular areas that you need. This is far superior to something like a RAG-based approach, where you're basically grabbing things at random because this allows you to recontextualize information and find related information, even if you don't have exact quotes or exact contextual information embedded in a higher-dimensional space.

Got it — thesis #3 noted.

Okay, thesis number four relates to software. So while agents can do a lot of things, there's still a lot of things that they struggle to do, particularly reading really complex tasks or, you know, highly repeatable tasks. Sometimes there are instances where code itself is the better way of doing something. And as a result, we need agents that are able to write code effectively and then humans need to be able to audit, understand, and use this code to do the work that they need to do. Thesis number four is that this code should live in line with the Obsidian Vault. So the vault itself will define a directory structure where all of the vault files will live. And the code should live in parallel to them. The idea here is that it keeps together like articles about a topic, like potentially articles about a program, with the code that actually uses that topic or utilizes that program. For instance, I might have like a financial folder that contains a bunch of scripts for financial things, and then I will have markdown files that document the different financial things that are going on. So you might have a finance folder and then finance scripts and then finance info, and they're all co-located together in a location that's easy to find and to understand. This makes it easier for agents and humans to work with because you're not following links across complex systems. You basically just have one file where everything is contained inside of it. So code should be co-located with the markdown vault and the markdown vault basically lives above not just markdown files in a wiki, but also code and other assets that aren't necessarily markdown or necessarily Obsidian compatible, but are related to Obsidian markdown files.

Got it — thesis #4 noted.

Okay, this is number five. AI-generated code introduces a new set of problems into software development that we have never seen before. Specifically, AI-generated code is difficult to trust, and it's difficult to validate. So typically, when humans are writing code and you have a good programmer working with you, you trust that their code will work and their code is well-tested, and you can basically test a couple of edge cases and make sure everything's correct. AI agents are not reached the point yet where they are fully trustworthy, and even if they do, there are potential limitations on like this trustworthiness. For instance, you know, agents may not have the right context. They might make mistakes, not because it's wrong, but because it's not the way that you like to do things. And then AI agents also think about the world and see the world in a different way than humans do. So for instance, like when building UIs, AI agents struggle to validate the UIs in the same way they could validate like CLI interfaces, because they just don't naturally work with them quite as well, whereas humans, it's like you see a UI, you know exactly how to use it. Alternatively, agents also...

Got it — thesis #5 noted so far.

Yeah, I guess I'm kind of rambling on thesis 5, but I guess the main theory here is that the biggest issues with agent generated code are issues of trust and issues of control, where first I need to be able to trust that the agent is doing the thing that I want it to, and second, I want to be able to control and define specific application behavior as precisely as possible and guarantee that the agent's implementation adheres to that configuration. This again kind of comes back to the trust thing, where it's like, if I can trust that I have control over the application, I feel a lot better of the outputs of AI generated code than if it's just kind of generating stuff and I have no idea what's going on. So this control and this trust kind of comes down to a big question of understandability, and understandability right now is very expensive because it requires reading a lot of code.

Got it — thesis #5 noted.

All right, this is number six. In order to fix this observability, transparency problem, this understandability issue, in order to better utilize AI-generated code, I propose that all codebases should effectively adhere to a UML-esque schema. This UML schema is primarily what the human is actually interacting with, and this UML schema defines all of the components of the application that the AI agent is generating. This kind of mimics how managers or architects will potentially architect code today, where you might build something in UML or build diagrams and build technical design documents. These documents define what it is that you're actually trying to build and what all the requirements are, and then the junior engineers or the lower-level engineers will go and actually implement each of those features such that they conform with the document. My proposal

Got it — thesis #6 noted so far.

Okay, this is number seven. My proposal to implement thesis number six is that the UML schema or diagram-based schema needs to be a language that is effectively cross-compatible or cross-compilable to a few different media. So the first one is that this schema needs to basically convert to a diagram. So you can see it, you can visualize it, you can understand it quickly without having to actually like dive into code and try to piece together in your mind how things connect. The second thing is that this schema should map onto actual code types. So you should be able to basically compile the schema in such a way that you get types out the other end or function definitions or interfaces or, you know, whatever, such that you can guarantee that effectively the code that the agent builds conforms to the schema because it is using the same types that you defined in the schema itself. It also needs to be cross-compilable to, or I guess accessible by a coding agent. So it needs to be a simple enough language that a coding agent can quickly understand it and it can read it naturally without having to look at like images. This is one of the biggest issues with using like UML for this type of schema because UML is a purely visual language and agents do not naturally process visual information. They're much better at processing text. And so you need a basically text-based language that can compile to both diagrams as well as to types as well as to, like, is, I guess, readable by agents. Additionally, it needs to be lintable. So you'd be able to confirm that the language or whatever it is that you're building that the agent can read is actually syntactically valid without actually having an agent look at it, you can like, basically statically determine that the code is correct.

Got it — thesis #7 noted.

Let me know when you're finished with all theses, and I’ll compile everything into a clean, publishable Markdown report.

Thesis number eight is that the type of diagram that is most useful for understanding a codebase is effectively a data flow diagram. So basically defining and understanding how, like what data inputs you have, what types of transformations you apply to that data, and then what the final outputs are that you're looking for. These data flow diagrams are easiest to understand if they can be basically configured as a DAG, so a directed acyclic graph, basically allowing you to flow from top to bottom, understanding what the inputs are and what the outputs are. So for instance, like I might have a finance application where the finance application, maybe I pull some data from a, like stock market ticker, and then I transform that data using a bunch of algorithms into different metrics that I'm interested in, and then I will turn those metrics into a dashboard, and then that dashboard is the thing I display output. The diagrams are basically capture that data flow from start to finish, allowing users to quickly and easily gain understanding as to what the application is doing, and if they want to modify it, they can modify that diagram by adding different inputs or different connections.

Got it — thesis #8 noted.

Continue when ready.

Okay, next thesis is that it is my opinion that functional programming is the best way to implement AI generated code. The reason for this fundamentally comes down to abstraction and to testability. So, first off with abstraction. Our schema is implemented as a visual data flow diagram that effectively represents data and transformations. The opaque part of this process is fundamentally the transformations. So I take something and I turn it into something else. How I do that can either be very explicit or very ill-defined depending on the level of abstraction I'm using in my data flow diagram. So, what I mean by that is effectively the interesting part of the diagram are the functions and the data itself is kind of just a static thing, it's the goal, it's the inputs to the outputs that I actually have that are maybe less interesting to think about. And so you really want to be thinking about the transformations in this diagram, not necessarily the data itself. The next component of this has to do with testability, where functional programming is potentially very amenable to being able to test the methods that are generated. Specifically because functional programming likes this idea of one input, one output, it's basically a mapping from an input to an output. You can define a set of tests that confirm that for a given input, your output is correct. So for instance, like a functional programming paradigm might have a function called add, and I can do the numbers one and two, and then the result is going to be the number three. And so I can map that input pairing to an output, and I can confirm that function is performing as expected. Object-oriented programming can become much more difficult to test and reason about as you're starting to group together and tightly couple a lot of different code. Functional programming keeps that code weakly coupled, which is advantageous for our implementation and for reasoning about code blocks independently.

Got it — thesis #9 noted.

Let me know when you're finished.

Okay, thesis number 10. This has to do with how functions are defined. So when we think about functions, especially in the coding sense, we oftentimes think about code as, or like the code itself as the function. So it's like I've got a method, you know, method add adds together two numbers and returns some integer. But that's not the only way to define a function. In my mind, there are actually three different ways to define a function. The first one is with the code itself. And this maps kind of the mathematical concept of like an algorithm or like an equation, like a plus b equals c, or, you know, for instance, x squared plus y squared equals four. That defines a circle in the same way a function or a method in programming defines a curve. The second way, though, you can mathematically define a function is effectively using data points. So, for instance, for defining a circle, I don't necessarily have to use an equation, x squared plus y squared equals four. I could define four points on that circle, or three points on that circle, and that will define for me a unique curve. For instance, I could define the point 0, 2, 2, 0, and negative 2, 0. And any circle that passes through those three points will be the same circle as the x squared plus y squared equals four. This concept maps onto the concept of tests in programming. So in a test, typically what you're doing is you're passing some input into the function, and then you're getting some output of that input, and then you're checking to make sure that the output matches what you'd expect. This is the exact same type of thing as defining a set of points along a curve. So points on a curve are basically tests in the programming sense. And then the third way to define a curve is verbally, like you can basically describe the attributes of that thing in order to define what the thing is. So if I said a circle of radius 2 centered on the origin, that's equivalent to those three points that I gave, and it's also equivalent to the equation.

Got it — thesis #10 noted.

Continue when ready.

Okay, this is number 11. So, if you can define a function in three different ways, specifically, you can define it as tests, you can define it as documentation, or you can define it as the actual code itself, and all three of those things are equivalent, they need to be kept in sync, and in my opinion, they need to be kept together. So frequently, with human-written code, you will put tests in a different directory from your code, and sometimes you'll need to have documentation in a different directory from both. I think personally that's a mistake. I think all three need to be kept together because they all three describe the same function, and all three of them need to be kept in sync. This is one of the key challenges of writing code, is keeping these three definitions perfectly in sync. As a result, it is my belief that there should be a standard file structure that effectively defines a function. So, in this idea, functions are not just blocks of code anymore, right? It's not just a single Python file or, you know, a method. Instead, code is an entire folder of things, including tests, as well as documentation, as well as the code itself, and potentially even static assets relating to that code, but then uniquely define this function. This has a couple of different advantages. First, of course, it makes it easier to keep everything in sync. So if you are in this directory, you have all the stuff that you need to keep in sync. So if you make one change in one place, you can make that change at the other places as well. Furthermore, it also helps to make this thing atomic. So if I go and I modify something or I move it or I copy it over, I know I've copied over the entire function and not just a chunk of the definition of the function. I got the whole dang thing if I copy the folder.

Got it — thesis #11 noted.

Let me know when you’re finished, and I’ll compile everything into a structured Markdown manifesto.

Next thesis is that if I'm subscribing to this idea that functions are more than just a single file or a single block of code definition, they're entire folders of assets, then I need to very rigorously define what this folder structure should be. We want a highly standardized folder structure that can be copied and pasted over and over and over again such that if someone is looking at the schema and they want to understand a component of that schema, like a specific function in it, they should be able to immediately and instantly find the folder that is associated with it. One kind of hallmark of human-generated code is there's a lot of like design types of trade-offs where, you know, maybe I choose to structure it one way or another depending on, like, what the problem is. I think for AI-generated code, that is a huge mistake because you're generating so much more of it. And so changing your design decisions based on what is theoretically optimal for a given problem will make it more difficult for humans to actually come in and review this code later because it's nonstandard. You want extreme standardization across all of your code and all of your code bases so that when a human comes in to review this, if they've never seen it before, they can immediately find exactly the thing that they are looking for based on what they're seeing in their higher-level diagrams.

Got it — thesis #12 noted.

Okay, next thesis. I want to talk a little bit more about the definition of tests. So, what I described before, there are basically three different ways of describing a function, right? There's the equation, there's the points on that function, and then there is the documentation. So, naturally, whenever you define a function in code, the equation part of it becomes actual code, so you'll find it in like a Python file or a TypeScript file or whatever language you're using. Naturally, whenever you're defining documentation, that should go in something like a Markdown file, where it's an English description of what the thing is going on, and you can use Markdown highlighting and syntax and formatting to fully describe the thing that you're wanting to describe. Finally, though, we get to tests. And tests are actually a little bit funny, because we define tests mathematically as effectively a collection of points on this curve, but in programming, for some reason, we define tests as code, which is another curve. So, we're almost defining, like, weirdly mathematically a set of points as a curve, and I personally think that's a mistake. I think that tests should be defined as what they are, data. They are points. They are not the curve itself, but effectively points that make up that curve. And so, instead of writing tests as, like, pytest or, you know, Java tests, JavaScript tests, or, you know, .test files or whatever, we should instead be writing tests as collections of inputs and output points. My recommendation for how to do this would be to use JSON files. So, you have potentially one JSON file describing an input and one JSON file describing an output for each data point you're trying to define as your tests. So, like, for instance, you might actually have a file called tests that basically contains a hundred different test examples, and then each test example will include one input JSON and one output JSON. What this does, and this is kind of a huge advantage, is that if a human is coming in and trying to understand that this function works and confirm that it's doing the thing it's supposed to be doing, they don't have to go and look at the code to fully understand it. They can look at the tests. So, they can actually look at the input data and the output data and confirm that it's mapping in the way it should be from the input to the output. Furthermore, you don't have to find and reason and abstract about all of the different use cases. You can basically randomly select a subset that allows you to get an understanding as to the input-output mapping, and if enough of them look correct, you can have reasonable confidence that the function is working in the way it should. So, by defining tests as data, it becomes much easier for humans to reason about that input-output mapping as well as make modifications if it looks wrong. You don't actually have to reason about a curve, which is difficult. You can reason about data points, which is much easier.

Got it — thesis #13 noted.

Continue when ready.

This is number 14. This is a derivation from thesis 13, where if you accept the fact that tests should be defined as data, as opposed to as code, the natural extension here is that there must exist some larger framework that is able to take these tests, these data points, and turn them into actual tests that can be run through an existing test framework like Pytest. So for example, there should exist some like global level script that is able to look at a standard directory of points, as well as look at my standard location for my function, and be able to create on the fly Pytests that map one-to-one to those data points. i.e., I don't need to write the test code inside of my directory itself that basically I have somewhere else code that generates those tests that can be run on the fly to confirm that all of those input-output mappings do actually match with the function that we defined in code.

Got it — thesis #14 noted.

Another piece is about my code base here, is that the structure of the code base should follow the structure of the schema. So just like I mentioned that the schema itself needs to map to both a linter as well as to a diagram as well as to other things, it should also map to the file structure itself, i.e. you should be able to look at a schema file and you should immediately be able to infer what file system is represented by that schema, or what file system is needed in order to implement that schema.

Got it — thesis #15 noted.

If you have more, continue. When you're done, tell me you're finished and I’ll compile the full manifesto into a clean, structured Markdown document ready to publish.

Next thesis is that the schema itself should be recursive or fractal. And what I mean by that is that at the highest level, you should be able to basically look at a code base and in a couple steps understand what it is that it does, or an application and understand what it is that it does. So back to my finance app, you might have some inputs that you're pulling from some data source, then you might apply some transformation to those inputs to get a bunch of metrics, and then you might turn around and display those metrics in a dashboard. That's like a three-step process or two-step process. But each of those steps contain a huge number of sub-steps. So exactly which transformations I'm running, how to run those transformations, are details that I might not care about at a very high level, but if I actually get into the code and want to like make modifications to it, then I do care a lot about the specific implementations of those sub-steps. The thing is, because we're using kind of a functional standard and a data flow standard here, those transformations look like many applications. So they have some inputs, they have some outputs, and they have a bunch of intermediate steps that you will go through in order to map those inputs to those outputs. And so this structure naturally kind of starts to look like a fractal, where you've got your application level on top, and then you have your function implementations below that, and then those functions may rely on a bunch of sub-functions, and each of those sub-functions can rely on other sub-functions, all the way down until you have the most basic implementation of every component. So this fractal structure of the schema should be represented across the entire span of what that schema compiles to, including the file system. The file system itself should have a recursive structure similar to that schema.

Got it — thesis #16 noted.

If there are more, continue. When you’re finished, say the word and I’ll compile everything into a structured Markdown manifesto.

Another thesis is that, for this to work well, humans should have access to a very good graphical editor for the schema. What that means is humans should be able to very quickly, like, basically, as agents change the schema itself, humans should be able to see those changes in real time in the graphic editor, and humans should be able to click, drag, drop, and move things around in the schema as they see fit without having to describe it to an agent. This is kind of a more natural workflow that allows you to quickly modify applications and quickly describe what it is that you're actually looking for without needing to basically use the agent as an intermediary.

Got it — thesis #17 noted.

If there’s more, continue. When you’re fully finished, tell me and I’ll compile everything into a cohesive, publication-ready Markdown manifesto.

Okay, next thesis. One of the biggest pain points in agent-driven code is trying to manage the multiple different agents, coding agents at the same time. So what I mean by that is, if you are a human that's trying to write some code and you're using agents to do so, you tell one agent to do something, it'll spend about five minutes running around trying to do that thing, then it'll return to you some result that you'll then have to check and confirm is accurate. During that time, you're either twiddling your thumbs, waiting for the agent to finish, or you're working on some other task. That other task often involves another agent, so you'll go and talk to that second agent and tell it what you want to do, and it will go and spin its thumbs for about five minutes and it'll come back to you. This is a extremely taxing workflow on humans because you are having to juggle context switching across multiple different domains constantly. It's very difficult to do, it's very difficult to maintain, and it is a serious bottleneck in agent-generated code.

Got it — thesis #18 noted.

If you have more, continue. When you're done, I’ll assemble everything into a structured, publication-ready Markdown manifesto.

to avoid this domain switching, my proposal is to use a multi-agent system for interactive code writing. What that means and how this looks in my mind is effectively you have a single agent that you are interacting with that is effectively helping you define your requirements and initialize a bunch of sub-agents that actually are doing the work. The kind of key feature of this agent is it should be very, very fast. It should get back to you almost instantly. It should be able to quickly understand what it is you're talking about and synthesize that to requirements. It's basically just something you're talking to. You're having a natural conversation with this agent, and this agent is then in the back end managing all of the other complexity that actually is involved with writing code. But importantly, this agent is not writing code itself. It's kind of like a coordinator agent where it's coordinating other agents quickly, and those other agents are doing a lot of heavy lifting in order to actually write the code or do the things that need doing. In this way, you actually have an assistant that's helping you manage this context for you. So instead of having to basically jump back and forth between multiple different AI developers that are working on different things and having to context switch between those multiple different times per hour, instead, you're basically working with a single agent who's handling all that context switching for you, and you are just having one natural long conversation with this one agent, and it's able to shoehorn in information as things update and change. So like if an agent comes back with a result, that orchestrator agent may hold on to that for a moment as it finishes its initial kind of natural conversation with you, and then it will basically tell you about it and then allow you to context switch over to this new thing, which it will then set up for you, and then you can actually go and test and run and then get feedback on. So, i.e., this entire thesis is based around the idea that instead of working with multiple agents to write software, you should always be working with one. And this one agent should be living with you at the same speed and not delayed by the actual implementation difficulties.

Got it — thesis #19 noted.

If there’s anything else, continue. When you’re completely finished, just say so and I’ll compile the full manifesto into a structured, polished Markdown document ready for publication.

Okay, next thesis. Given that we are focusing on a local file system-based approach, I propose that these multi-agent systems should be managed through the file system. What this looks like in practice is effectively a sequence of markdown files that describe instructions that the agent is supposed to do, and then an orchestrator, not necessarily an agent, but an orchestrator that's able to basically take these markdown files, kick off agentic subprocesses, and then return results to potentially an orchestrator agent that is then actually communicating with you. So i.e. we are organizing everything through the file system. A practical implementation of this is to have every task be its own file, and then effectively using metadata living at the top of that file to describe what status that task is in for the orchestrator. So for example, like I may have a task that says like, write a TypeScript application that displays a dashboard for financial data. And then it might have in the header information on like the current status, like is it ready to start? Is it still meeting requirements? Are there questions that need to be answered? Is this finished? Is it ready for review? Like what status is it in? By basically making each thing its own file, you prevent conflicts between different agents in the system.

Got it — thesis #20 noted.

If you have more, continue. When you’re fully finished, I’ll compile everything into a cohesive, structured Markdown manifesto ready for publication.

next thesis is a very simple one. Git should be used for version control for all of this file system-based stuff. There should be, or agents should use Git work trees in order to copy different versions of the repository to make edits in local environments, allowing multiple different agents to run in parallel on different tasks, and then the merge can be handled later by a different agent.

Got it — thesis #21 noted.

If there are any remaining theses, continue. When you're completely finished, tell me and I’ll compile the full manifesto into a structured, publication-ready Markdown document.

I think that’s it